# Overview of the Data



Nearly a century ago the FBI started collecting data on crime that occurred in the United States as a way to better understand and respond to crime. This data, the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program Data, is a monthly count of the number of crime incidents (in cases where more than one crime happens per incident, only the most serious crime is included) in each police agency that reports data.^[This data has been expanded since it began in 1929 to include information on arrests, hate crimes, and stolen property. For more on this, please see my book Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program Data: A Practitioner’s Guide at ucrbook.com.] Other than for homicides, only the number of crimes that occurred is included. So we know, for example, the number of robberies in a city but nothing about who the victims or offenders were, when that month (day or time of day) the robberies occurred, or the type of location where they happened. To address these limitations the FBI started a new dataset in 1991, the National Incident-Based Reporting System data, which is known by its abbreviation NIBRS, and is the topic of this book.

NIBRS data provides detailed information on every crime reported to the police, including victim and offender demographics, whether the offender was arrested (and type of arrest or type of "exceptional clearance"), the crime date and hour, victim-offender relationship, and the crime location (as a location type, not the exact address). It also covers a far wider range of crimes than UCR data did. With the exception of UCR data on assaults against police officers, all NIBRS data can be converted back to UCR data, making it fully backwards compatible - and, therefore, comparable to UCR data. In many ways NIBRS data is a massive improvement to UCR data. We now have a far deeper understanding of crime and this has led to an explosion of research that allows a far more detailed analysis of crime and crime-policies than the blunt UCR data. 

However, this is a major limitation to this data: most agencies don't use it. [According to the FBI](https://www.fbi.gov/news/pressrel/press-releases/fbi-releases-2019-nibrs-crime-data) only about 8,500 police agencies, covering about 45% of the US population, reported NIBRS data in 2019 (the latest year currently available), fewer than half of the about 18,000 police agenices in the United States. This is an even larger problem that it seems are the agencies that do report - especially in earlier years of the data - are disproportionately small and rural. So we're missing out of data from major cities. A number of states don't have any agencies reporting, making this data relatively biased at least in terms of geography and city size. **Even so, the FBI has said that they are moving entirely to NIBRS data starting in 2021, and will no longer even collect UCR data.** While NIBRS can be converted to UCR data, meaning we can have consistent statistics over time, for agencies that don't report to NIBRS, we have no information on their crimes. In effect, unless the majority of agencies suddenly switch to NIBRS - which, given the high level of detail relative to UCR data is a costly and timely switch - we will be flying blind for most crime in the country. 

So there are really three major problems with NIBRS data, both related to the lack of reporting. First, we are potentially looking at a massive loss of data when UCR data ends in 2020 - it takes over a year for data to be released so even though I'm writing this is Spring 2021, 2019 UCR and NIBRS data are the latest years available. Especially given the huge crime changes during 2020 - and whose violent crime increases and continuing into 2021 - losing standardized crime data for most cities is a very bad thing. The second problem is that even if suddenly all agencies do start reporting in 2021, we'd only have a single year of data available. Even for agencies that already report, we generally don't have too many years of data for them. This really limits the kind of research since we can do since it's hard to know if a finding is based on a trend or is just a weird outlier without having many years of data available. This means that for the next several years at least we'll be mostly using NIBRS data as UCR-like datasets, aggregated to the month- or year-level so we can compare it with UCR data from the past. Luckily, this problem will be alleviated the longer we wait as more years of data will become available. 

The final issue is that this data is massive. A single year of 2019 data, with <50% of agencies, and few large agencies, reporting has about 6.5 million crime incidents recorded. Since each crime incident can have multiple victims, offenders, and crimes, there are more rows for these datasets. Once all agencies report - though it's doubtful that'll ever occur - we're looking at tens of millions of rows per year. And even now if we wanted to look at a decade of data we're going to be dealing with over 50 million rows of data. So this data requires both good hardware - a strong laptop or server is necessary - and good programming skills, which most academics sorely lack. 

While people generally refer to NIBRS just as "NIBRS data" it is actually a collection multiple different datasets all corresponding to a single crime incident. For example, if you care about victim info you'll look in the victim file called the "Victim Segment" (each of the datasets are called "Segments" since they are part of the whole picture of the crime incident) and likely will merge it with other data, such as when are where the crime occurred which is in the "Offense Segment". In most cases you'll merge together multiple datasets from the NIBRS collection to be able to answer the question that you have. This means that you'll need to understand how to deal with multiple datasets, and subset and merge them as needed.

Relative to the FBI's UCR data there are far fewer "weird things" in NIBRS data. Still, we'll cover instances of the "weirdness" in the data, such as the why crime always goes up on the 1st of the month, or why there are more crimes at noon than at nearly all other hours of the day. We'll also be discussing how much of the detailed information that should be available in the data is missing, and when that affects which questions we can answer. 

A word of caution. To date fewer than half of agencies report NIBRS data. As they rush to comply with the FBI's order that they only will accept NIBRS data, there will likely be more mistakes made and erroneous data included in NIBRS data later than is covered in this book, which ends with 2019 data as 2019 is the most recent year available. So while I always urge caution when using any data - caution that should be accompanied by a thorough examination of your data before using it - NIBRS data from 2020 and beyond merits extra attention.

## NIBRS gives you choices (which means you need to think)

A major benefit of UCR data is that you have very limited choices. If you wanted to measure crime you only choice was to use their monthly aggregated city-level data. This makes working with the data relatively easy, even though what work you could do was limited. NIBRS data takes an opposite approach. It provides detailed data and largely leaves it up to the users for what to do with it. This flexibility is also a curse.

### Choosing a unit of analysis

Consider, for example, that you want to measure rape in a city. Even if we somehow solve the issue of victims not reporting their rapes, we still have a few different ways of even measuring rape. Let's use an incident where four men rape a single woman as an example. If you're interested in measuring robbery you could do so in several different ways, each of which addresses a different part of crime measurement and will lead to different answers to your questions: the number of crime incidents, the number of victims, the number of offenders, and the number of crimes. First, we can follow the old UCR measure of incident-level and say that this is one rape since only one crime incident occurred (even though there were multiple offenders). Second, we could look at the victim-level, which again is one rape as there was only one victim. Or at the offender-level, which now has four rapes since each offender would be responsible the robbery. Finally we could look at the offense-level. This data actually makes it unclear what act each offender actually committed so we'd likely measure it as one offense per offender in each incident.^[For four people involved in a rape, do we care if all four actually committed the crime? Does it matter if only three committed the rape and one merely stood by?]

## Crimes included in NIBRS

### Index crimes

## NIBRS does not have unfounded crimes

## A summary of each segment file




 

## The data as you get it from the FBI
